New guide: Filtering and sorting with chronological values (#1917)
meilisearch/documentation: learn/advanced/working_with_dates.md

# Working with dates

In this guide, you will learn about Meilisearch's approach to date and time values, how to prepare your dataset for indexing, and how to chronologically sort and filter search results.

## Preparing your documents

To filter and sort search results chronologically, your documents must have at least one numeric field containing a [UNIX timestamp](https://kb.narrative.io/what-is-unix-time).

As an example, consider a database of video games. In this dataset, the release year is formatted as a timestamp:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 0,
    "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_timestamp": 1538949600
  },
  {
    "id": 1,
    "title": "The Excavation of Hob's Barrow",
    "genre": "adventure",
    "release_timestamp": 1664316000
  },
  {
    "id": 2,
    "title": "Bayonetta 2",
    "genre": "action",
    "release_timestamp": 1411164000
  }
]
```

> If your chronological data is expressed in another format, like [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html), you must convert it to a numeric value before indexing it with Meilisearch.

Author: I like that. Made a couple of edits directly in your suggestion, committing it now.

Most programming languages have built-in tools to help you with this process. The JavaScript example below converts a game's release date, `"2018-10-18"`, to a numeric timestamp:

```js
let game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "release_date": "2018-10-18T00:00Z"
};

> const timestamp = Date.parse(game.year);

Author: Duh, thanks for that.

To build up on it, what about this:

```suggestion
const timestampInMilliseconds = Date.parse(game.year); // Javascript's Date.parse returns the timestamp in milliseconds
const timestamp = timestampInMilliseconds / 1000; // UNIX timestamps must be in seconds
```

> const timestamp = Date.parse(game.year);

Reviewer: I don't think `Javascript's` in front of `Date.parse` is useful but the rest is 👌

:::

After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, [index your data](/reference/api/documents.md#add-or-replace-documents) as usual. See below for an example using our nonexistent video games dataset.

```sh
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/documents' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary @games.json
```

## Filtering by timestamp

To filter search results based on their timestamp, add your document's timestamp field to the list of [`filterableAttributes`](/reference/api/settings.md#update-filterable-attributes):

```sh
curl \
  -X PUT 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/settings/filterable-attributes' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '[
    "release_timestamp"
  ]'
```

Once you have configured `filterableAttributes`, you can filter search results by date. The following query only returns games released between 2018 and 2022:

```sh
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/games/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "q": "",
    "filter": "release_timestamp >= 1514761200 AND release_timestamp < 1672527600"
  }'

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe an example in JS would be more convenient to read than curl. I mean, maybe we could have a code part ([with `Date`](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9873197/how-to-convert-date-to-timestamp)?) where we transform `2018` and `2022` into a timestamp. It's easier to understand we are searching between 2018 and 2022 with the date written than seeing `1514761200` and `1672527600` and guessing it means `2018` and `2022`

@bidoubiwa WDYT? Maybe it's not performant to do this?

Reviewer: I agree that javascript is easier to read; the issue is that we need to import meilisearch-js.
Are you thinking about something like that: 

```js
const { MeiliSearch } = require('meilisearch')
const client = new MeiliSearch({ host: '...' })

let documents = [ { id: 1, release_date: "2018-10-18T00:00Z" },  {}] // etc

documents = documents.map(document => ({
  ...document,
  release_timestamp: Date.parse(document.release_date) / 1000,
}))
await client.index('games').addDocuments(documents)

// wait for tasks?

const searchResults = client.index('games').search('', {
  filters: 'release_timestamp >= 1514761200 AND release_timestamp < 1672527600',
})  // Where 1514761200 is Sunday, December 31, 2017  and 1514761200 is Saturday, December 31, 2022

```

My bad if I misunderstood. The code can be made more readable btw.

Reviewer: That's oke for me!

    "genre": "action",
    "release_timestamp": 1411164000
  }
]
```

If your date field is expressed in a format other than a numeric timestamp, like [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html), you must convert it before indexing it with Meilisearch.

Most programming languages have built-in tools to help you with this process. The JavaScript example below converts a game's release date, `"2018-10-18"`, to a numeric timestamp:

```js
let game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "release_date": "2018-10-18T00:00Z"
};

const timestampInMilliseconds = Date.parse(game.year); // Date.parse returns the timestamp in milliseconds
const timestamp = timestampInMilliseconds / 1000; // UNIX timestamps must be in seconds

game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "release_date": "2018-10-18T00:00Z",
  "release_timestamp": timestamp
};
```

:::tip
When preparing your dataset, it can be useful to leave the original date and time fields in your documents intact. In the example above, we keep the `release_date` field because it is more readable than the raw `timestamp`.
:::

> After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, [index your data](/reference/api/documents.md#add-or-replace-documents) as usual. See below for an example using our nonexistent video games dataset.

Reviewer 3: Technically, we do have a dataset with 3 games, so idk if we should say "nonexistent". We have a similar dataset for the geosearch guide as well

Reviewer 4: If we refer to "our video games dataset" but don't provide a downloadable `videogamesdataset.json` file anywhere on the page, I can only see that confusing and misleading users. I think either we keep it how it is (rewording possible), or we provide an actual video games dataset.

Personally I support the former option, because it's less work and I don't think that a downloadable dataset would add much value to this guide. But maybe I'm wrong?

Author: Perhaps `hypothetical` is a better word?

Reviewer 3: How about the wording we used in geosearch:
>Using our [example dataset](https://docs.meilisearch.com/restaurants.json),

Author: Followed @maryamsulemani97's suggestion, re-requesting reviews

    "genre": "action",
    "release_timestamp": 1411164000
  }
]
```

If your date field is expressed in a format other than a numeric timestamp, like [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html), you must convert it before indexing it with Meilisearch.

Most programming languages have built-in tools to help you with this process. The JavaScript example below converts a game's release date, `"2018-10-18"`, to a numeric timestamp:

```js
let game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "release_date": "2018-10-18T00:00Z"
};

const timestampInMilliseconds = Date.parse(game.year); // Date.parse returns the timestamp in milliseconds
const timestamp = timestampInMilliseconds / 1000; // UNIX timestamps must be in seconds

game = {
  "id": 0,
  "title": "Return of the Obra Dinn",
  "genre": "adventure",
  "release_date": "2018-10-18T00:00Z",
  "release_timestamp": timestamp
};
```

:::tip
When preparing your dataset, it can be useful to leave the original date and time fields in your documents intact. In the example above, we keep the `release_date` field because it is more readable than the raw `timestamp`.
:::

> After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, [index your data](/reference/api/documents.md#add-or-replace-documents) as usual. The example below adds a <a id="downloadRestaurants" href="/restaurants.json" download="restaurants.json">videogame dataset</a> to a `games` index:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After adding a numeric timestamp to all documents, [index your data](/reference/api/documents.md#add-or-replace-documents) as usual. The example below adds a <a id="downloadVideogames" href="/videogames.json" download="videogames.json">videogame dataset</a> to a `games` index:
```

Author: oops! That's what happens when I'm on a rush 😓
